
--- PAGE 1 ---
THE MAXIMAL COVERING LOCATION PROBLEM
RICHARD CHURCH
CHARLES ReVELLE
The Johns Hopkins University
The belief that mathematical location modeling can identify "optimal" location
patterns rests on the basis that some realistic objective can he identified and by some
measure quantified.
For example, in the area of private facilities location analysis,
a reasonably accurate statement of the objective of locating warehouses is to mini-
mize the costs of manufacturing and distribution.
Since most cost elements in-
cluded in the objectives of private facility location can be reasonably estimated,
the models can picture with some degree of accuracy the reallocation problem they
are designed to solve.
Unlike private facility location ana lysis, the objectives of public facility loca-
tion analysis are more difficult to embrace and to quantify.
The difficulty in defin-
ing direct measures of public objectives has resulted in a search for some surrogate
measure with
which
the decision maker may
be comfortable.
Two different
surrogate measures which have received attention in location models are:
(I)
total weighted distance or time for travel to the facilities, and (2) the distance or
time that the user most distant from a facility would have to travel to reach that
facility, tha t is, the maxi mal service distance,'"
The use of a maximal service distance as a measure of the value of a given
locational configuration has been discussed at length by Torcgas and ReVelle' who
show thal it is an important surrogate measurement for the value of a given
locational configuration.
For a given location solution, the maximum distance
which any user would have to travel to reach a facility would reflect the worst
possible performance of the
system.
In the
regional location
of emergency
facilities such as fire stations or ambulance dispatching stations, the concept of
Ihe maxi mal scrv ice distance is well esta blished." 3
The maximal service distance concept appears in the Location Set Covering
The authors gratefully acknowledge a grant by the Ford Foundation to the Department of
Geography and
Environmental Engineering of
The
Johns
Hopkins
University.
This grant
supported the computer studies associated with this work,
• The concept of a maximal service distance is used throughout this text, although the
usc of a maximal service time may be equally applicable.
, C. Torcgas und C. Revelle, "Optimal Location under Time
01'
Distance Constraints,"
Papers of the Regionul Science Associatlon, XXV 111, 1972.
~ National Board of Fire Underwriters, "Standard Schedule for <-trading Cities and Towns
of the U.S. with Reference to their Fire Defenses and Physical Conditions," New York. 19Sf>.
a H, Huntley, ..Emergency Hea IIh Services for the Nation," Public Healtb Reports, LXXXV.
No.6 (June, 1970).
101

--- PAGE 2 ---
102
PAPI" O. TNI IIGIONAL ICIINCI A.SOCIATlON, YOLUMI THIItTY.TWO
Problern.v":"
This problem identifies the minimal number and
the location of
facilities, which ensures that no demand point will be farther than the maximal service
distance from a facility.
Ry solving the location set covering problem over a range
of values of distance, it is possible to develop a cost-effectiveness curve from the pairs
of numbers (maximal service distance S, minimum number of facilities to cover).
The number of facilities is used in the location set covering problem as the
only cost factor which enters the decision process.
There exists evidence that
isolating the number of facilities as the most significant cost parameter may be
valid in many real world formulations,
Specifically, if unit costs are independent
of site and number of demand points covered, the use of number of facilities is a
correct indicator of cost.
Examination of the cost-effectiveness curve reveals that for a given number of
facilities there
may be many location solutions which fulfill the requirement of
coverage.
For a desired level of expenditure then (e.g., fixed number of facilities),
nne mily wish to dctcrrninc the solution with lhe smallcsl maxirnaI service .1 is-
ranee.":":
This point on the curve is identified by Minieka!" as the left-most
corner point of the curve for a stated number of facilities.
It could happen that the distance value obtained in this manner is much larger
than the desired distance S.
If it is, the decision maker may shift his aucntion to
concern with the total population covered within S.
Having realized that his
rcsources (facilities) arc iIlSU fficic nt to achieve total coverage within his distance
goal, the decision maker may seck to cover as many as possible within S using
those limited resources.
That is, facing the reality of an insufficient number of
facilities, he may relinquish his goal or total coverage within S and attempt instead
to locate the facilities in such a way that as fcw people as possible lie outside the
desired service distance.
What is being suggested is a third surrogate for the
utility of a location pattern
the population covered within some desirable dis-
tance.
The following problem may be stated:
Maximize coverage (population covered) within a desired service distance S by
locating a fixed number of facilities.
We will designate this problem as the Maximal Covering Location Problem
(MCLP).
• Turegas lind ReVelle, op. rit., p. I.
• C. Toregas, C. ReVelle, R. Swain, and L. Bergman, "The Locution of l-mcrgcncy Service
Facilities," Operations Research, XIX, No,S (October, 1971).
• C. Torcgas and {'. ReVelle, "Binary Logic Solutions 10 a Class of Location Problems."
G,'ogrol'hi",,/ Analysis, V, No.2 (April, 1973),
1 S. Hakimi, "Optimum Loca lion of Switching Centers and the Ahxolute Centers and Med ia11';
of a Graph," Opcrutlons Research, X II (1%4), p. 450,
~ M. Rosenthal and S. Smith, "The M-Center Problem," Operations Research Society of
America, 1967 National Meeting, New York, N.Y,
• E. Minieka, '·The M·('enler Problem," SIAM
Rf'~/'·H',
XII. No, I (January, 1970).
I. Ibid,

--- PAGE 3 ---
CHUICH, IIVILLI.
MAXIMAL COVIIING LOCATION PIO.LlM
103
1\ trade-off curve may he developed here as well showing the maximum
possible coverage within the desired distance S for various levels of expend iture
(that is. for various numbers of faciiiIics).
Such a curve can he developed by
solving the maximal covering location problem for a fixed S over a range of number
of facilities.
The corresponding pairs of (number of facilities. maximal popula-
tion covered) creates the desired curve.
For instance, five facilities may be positioned
to achieve coverage of 90 percent of the popular ion. hut ten facilities may be
required for JOO percent coverage.
The decision maker may view the required
additional funds as money which could be spent in other beneficial ways than
coverage within the desirable distance.
Although the decision maker may focus his interest on covering as many as
possible within the desired service distance S. he may also he concerned with the
qua Iity of servicc aITorded people not covered wiIhin thal distance.
In fact. there
may be an undesirable distance 10 facilities. a distance standard. beyond which no
one should be.
In short. the decision maker may want to cover the maximum
popuIation possiblc within the desira ble distanee hut enstlre at the same lime that
no one is farther than a distance T(T > S) to his closest facility.
Insistence un
total coverage within T may be included in order 10 provide some degree of equity
to those not served within the shorter and more desirable service distance S.
The
closer T can come to the desirable distance S, the fairer the solution is to the
people not covered within S.
The following problem may be stated:
Locate
a fixed number of facilities in order to
maxrrruze the population
covered within a service distance S, while maintaining mandatory coverage
within a distance of T(T > S).
This problem shall be designated as the maximal covering location problem with
mandatory closeness constraints.
MATHEMATICAL PORMULATION Of THI
MAXIMAL COVERING LOCATiON PROBLEM
The
maximal
covering location
problem
seeks the
maximum
population
which can be served within a stated
service distance or time given a limited
number of facilities.
Defined on a network of nodes and arcs. a mathematical
formulation of this problem can be stated as follows:
L
Maximize
S.T.
Xj =
(0, l)
y, =
(0, I)
for all i E I
for all} E J
for all i E I
( I )
(2)
(3)
(4)

--- PAGE 4 ---
104
,.1.,.1., O' THI R.OIONAl SCIINC. ASSOCIATION, VOlUMI THIRTY·TWO
where
J =
denotes the set of demand nodes;
1 -
denotes the set of tucility sites;
S
the distance beyond which a demand point is considered "uncovered"
(the value of S can be chosen differently for each demand point if
desired);
d;i
~-
the shortest distance from node i to node i.
x . =... { I if a facility is allocated to site j
J
0 otherwise;
N, '-'" {j E lld;j < S);
Qi·'"' population to be served at demand node l;
p -
the number of facilities to be located.
N; is the set of facility sites eligible to provide "cover" to demand point i.
A
demand node is "covered" when the closest facility to that node is at a distance
less than or equal to S.
A demand node is "uncovered" when the closest facility
to that node is at a distance greater than S.
The objective is to maximize the number of people served or "covered" within
the desired service distance.
Constraints of type (I) allow y; to equal
I only
when one or more facilities are established at sites in the set N i (that is, one or
more Iacilities arc located within
S distance units of demand point i).
The
number of facilities allocated is restricted to equal p in constraint (2).
The solu-
tion 10 this problem specifies not only the largest amount of population that can
he covered but the p facilities that achieve this maximal coverage.
An equivalent formulation of the maximum covering location problem can be
derived by substituting 1- ji, -- )'i where
. =
{ 1 if demand node i is not covered by a facility within S distance
ji.
0 otherwise.
Constraints of type (I) can then be written as
i e J
which is equivalent to
i E I.
This inequality implies that either
L.; X; > I
jl
:T'Ii
or
Stated verbally, either one or more facilities are built within S units of demand
point i, or demand i is uncovered and .vi ·
l.
After variable substitution, the
objective can be written as
Maximize
(L.; 0;
L.;- OiYi) .
t.",,: 1
~ .... J

--- PAGE 5 ---
CHUICH, .IVILLI,
MAXIMAL COVIIING LOCATION PIO.L1M
105
Note that the first
sum
is a
known constant.
Since the maximization of a
negative quantity is equivalent to a minimization of the positive quantity, the
objective function can be simplified to
Minimize
This objective can be interpreted as minimizing the number of people that will
not be served within the maximal service distance.
The complete problem devel-
oped by variable substitution is:
II.
Minimize
S.T.
L: x,
'.c p
i\:,f
x,
- (0, I)
.Pi ~ (0. I)
for all i F I
for aUi E J
for all i E I .
(5)
(6)
(7)
(R)
This problem seeks to minimize the population left uncovered if p facilities are to
be located on a network.
The formulations are equivalent since one can be transformed mathematically
into the other by the variable substitution.
The latter formulation was utilized
in solving this problem with linear programming.
The maximal covering location
problem has been solved optimally hy linear programming and heuristically by
several methods.
SOLUTiON TECHNIQUES
Heurlltlc Approachell
The first heuristic considered is called the Greedy Adding (GA) Algorithm.
In order to achieve a maximal cover for {' facilities under a given service d istancc,
the algorithm starts with an empty solution set and then adds to this set one at a
time the best facility
sites.
The GA algorithm picks for the first facility that
site which covers the most of the total population.
For the second facility, Gi\
picks the site that covers the most of the population not covered by the first
facility.
Then, for the third facility, GA picks the site that covers the most of the
population not covered by the first and second facilities.
This process is con-
tinued until either p facilities have been selected or all the population is covered.
Details of the algorithm are given in Church."
When sol" ing for
the p-facility solution, the G i\
algorithm automal ically
calculates maximal cover values for the one- to p-facility problems.
It should he
noted here than the one-facility maximal covering solution obtained hy the GA
1L R. Church, "Synthesis of II Class of Public Facilities Location Models,"
Ph,D,
thesis
(The John, Hopkins University, Baltimore, Md., ]'174).

--- PAGE 6 ---
106
PAP.IS O' THI IIOIONAL SCIINCI ASSOCIATION, YOLUMI THIITY.TWO
algorithm is optimal, for the one-facility solution is by definition the site which
covers the most of the total
population,
However, for solutions where p is
greater than I, optimality is not guaranteed.
It is important to note that the GA algorithm never removes facility sites from
the solution set.
Therefore, it is possible that a facility site added to the solution
set in the early iterations of the algorithm may not be justified later in the algorithm
due to subsequent facility site assignments.
The presence of a "no longer justified"
site in the solution set would imply nonoptimality,
The GA algorithm, then,
could be improved by including a technique that would reduce the probability of
maintaining "no longer justified" sites in the solution set.
The second heuristic which builds on the first is designated as the Greedy
Adding with Substitution (GAS) Algorithm,
The GAS algorithm determines new
facility
1\)\;aliulI~
at euch iteration just as the Greedy Adding Algorithm did, but
in addit ion, seeks 10 improve the solution al each iteration by trying to replace
each facility one at a time with a facility at another "free" site.
If improvement is
possible, the facility site chosen to replace a particular facility is the one which
gives the greatest improvement in the objective.
The GAS algorithm is outlined
in Church."
The GAS algorithm, like the GA algorithm, automatically calculates maximal
coverage for problems with one, two, .,. to p facilities.
Again. however, global
optimality is not guaranteed.
The method of trying to replace one at a time the facilities in the solution in
an effort to improve coverage is similar in concept to the A·optimum method
introd uced by Shen l.in in solving the tra vcling salesrnan problem. I ~
In apply ing
the A-optimum concept to the maximal covering location problem, one can state
that a maximal covering solution is A-optimal if it is impossible to obtain a solu-
tion with greater cover by replacing any A of its facilities by any other srr (If) facility
sites.
Using this definition, GAS is classified as a l-optirnurn algorithm.
Conceptually, the GAS algorithm is similar to the Ignizio heuristic"
The
difference is that GAS replaces any facility in Ihe solution set by another facility
if resultant coverage increases, whereas the lgnizio heuristic replaces only the
facility sites which contribute less to the total coverage than the contribution
made by the last added facility.
The A·optimum method applied to a random
start solution or heuristically derived
solution has been used
by lgnizio and
Harnot t to solve the Iocat ion set covering solution. 10
The Ignizio heuristic has
-------- -----------
" 'hid.
" S, Lin, "Computer Solutions of the Traveling Salesman Problem,"
The R('I! Sy,I""tIJ Trchnica!
Journal, Xl.l V (Decemher, t9(,5).
l< J, P, lgnizto ami R. E. Shannon, "Heuristic Prugrumming Algorithm for Warehouse Loca-
tion," Atu: Transactions, II, No, 4 (December, J970).
11 J, 1'. Ignizio and R. M. Harnett, "Heuristically Aided
Set-covering Algorithms," Depart-
ment or Industrial Engineering, University or Alabama at Huntsville, 1972.

--- PAGE 7 ---
CMUICM, I.VILLI,
MAXIMAL COVEIINO LOCATION PIIO.LlM
107
been utilized by Case and White" to solve a problem related to the maximal
covering problem.
Case and White sought the maximum number of demand points rather than the
maximal population which could be covered with a stated number of facilities.
Their problem is a subproblem to the maximal covering problem with a.:
I for
all demand points.
Like the Ignizio heuristic, GAS allocates facilities to sites one
at a time in a steepest ascent manner and employs a subroutine which replaces
facilities in the solution which are no longer justified, due to subsequent facility
assignments.
From a more general viewpoint, the GAS and
Ignizio heuristics
resemble a warehouse location algorithm developed by Kuehn and Hamburger."
LInear Programming
Linear programming may also he applied to the maximal covering location
problem and will obtain globally optimal solutions.
All that is necessary is to
restrict the variables Xj and Yi in Problem II to be nonnegative instead of zero or
one.
In an optimal linear programming solution to this problem, the variable Xi
will never be greater than one (unless total coverage were achieved).
If some x,
were greater than one at optimality it could he reduced to one without violating any
constraint (5).
Further, the reduction could he applied toward increasing some
other x, within the constraint that total facilities equal p (6).
This will allow
some y; to he decreased leading to a decrease in the objective.
This contradicts
the assumption of optimality.
Since the objective function keeps each variable J; as small as possible and
because it is never necessary for jii to be greater than one in order to satisfy con-
straints (5), .Vi will never be greater than one in an optimal linear programming
solution.
Since X; will never he greater than one unless total coverage is achieved.
the linear program will terminate with an optimal solution where 0 < x; ::;: I for
all j E J and 0 .:s: "v; .:s: 1 for all i E I.
If linear programming is applied
and
total coverage is nor
possible,
the
optimal solution will have either:
Case I:
All x..J; - (0, I), called an "all-integer answer";
Case 2:
Some x/s fractional, called a "fractional answer."
If the linear program terminates with all
X; and .Pi ~ (0. I), the
optimal
solution to the maximal covering location problem has been determined.
If the
linear program terminates as Case 2, the optimal solution given is not feasible to
the zero-one problem.
More work will be necessary to obtain an optimal zero-one
,. J. White and K. Case. "On Covering Problems and the Central Facilities Location Prob-
lem," unpublished
paper,
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and Stale University,
Ulal:kshurg. Va.,
197.1.
17 A. Kuehn and N, Hamburger, "A Heuristic Approach for Locating Warehouses." Ml/II<IK"-
ment Science, X (19631, p. 643.

--- PAGE 8 ---
108
PAPIU O' THI RIDIONAL SCIINCI ASSOCIATION, VOLUMI THIRTY.TWO
solution.
The solution value does, however, make explicit the lower bound on
the objective function.
The Mathematical Programming System (MPS) on the 10M 360 Model 91
computer was used to obtain optimal linear programming solutions to maximal
covering problems.
The
problems were stated as minimizations of population
uncovered.
In order to solve the problem, a Fortran IV program was developed
to write the problem 011 a disc tile.
This disc file was developed in such a manner
that the MPS system could access the problem file and perform the necessary linear
programming algorithm.
When the solution for more than one number of facilities is desired for a
given network and a stated service distance S, postopti mal routines of the MrS
system were used.
For example, suppose that the desired range in the number of
facilities was p
I to P -
10.
The problem file was set up for the linear program
with p =
I.
After the MPS system obtained an optimal solution for this value
of p, the option for parameterization of the right-hand side was used to obtain
solutions for p
- 2 to P =
10.
The cost of computing each additional solution
(p ~ 2 to P
10) is only a small increment over that for the first solution (p =
I).
Re.olvlng FraCTIonal SolutIon. to the Linear Program
Our computational experience is that almost HO percent of the time the linear
programming solution is all zero-one.
Only approximately 20 percent of the
time it is necessary to resolve fractional problems.
Two different techniques, a
method of inspection and the method of Branch and Round. have been used to
obtain all integer solutions when the linear program terminates fractional.
The
first method shows that at times it is possible to determine an all-integer optimal
solution to a p-facility problem directly from the fractional p-facility solution and
from an optimal all-integer (p -
I)-facility solution.
The explanation of such a
possibility and the ease with which the fractional resolution can be made can be
hest described hy an actual example.
Consider the following information:
The maximal covering problem was solved over the range p
I to p
I)
for a 55-node network
by the
MrS system.
The solutions were all
zero-one except for the solutions at p -
8 and J' ~ 9.
The total popula-
tion
of
nodes
on
the
network
is
640.
The
seven-facility
solution
covers all hut two nodes; namely, demand node 1\ and demand node R.
The poulation at A is five and the population at B is two.
The smallest
population of any node is two.
Each demand node is a possible facility
site.
The
population
covered
hy
the
opt imal
but
fract ional
linear
programming solution with p ~ 8 was 639.
The problem, then. is 10 determine, if possible, Ihe optimal all-integer solutions for
p ~ Hand p -
I) using only the above informauon.
In order ttl do this the
following two observations are important:
I)
Since the optimal seven-facility solution covers all but A and B, the seven-

--- PAGE 9 ---
CHURCH, ItIVILLI.
MAXIMAL COVlltlNG LOCATION ",OILiM
109
facility solution covers 633 (i.e., 640 -- 5 ~ 2 -- 633).
2)
Either the optimal all-integer eight-facility solution will totally cover, or
given that it docs not, it can cover at most all the population except the
smallest
node
population.
This
means
that either the optimal eight-
facility solut ion will cover 640 or at most 638.
Since the optimal p =
8 linear program covers 639, the optimal all-integer p -- 8
solution cannot cover.
Thus, observation (2) shows that the all-integer optimal
answer can cover at most 63!L
By adding node 1\ to the seven-facility solution,
an eight-facility solution set is formed where coverage is 638.
Since this is the
best an eight-facility solution can possibly cover, this solution must be optimal.
Since the eight-facility solution cannot totally cover, a nine-facility solution that
can totally cover would indeed he optimal.
Such a solution is created by adding
nodes A and B to the seven-facility solution.
Thus, the information provided in
a (p -
l j-facility solution may be useful in determining an all-integer ,,-facility
solution, when such is not provided by linear programming.
The method of Hranch and Round I~
was applied to fractional linear program-
ming solutions which did not yield to the method of inspection.
By branching on a
fractional variable, i.e., by setting either x ,
I or x,
. 0, two more linear pro-
gramming problems arc created.
If the linear programming solution to each of
these two problems has all x, -
(0, I), the solution that has the smaller value of
the objective function is optimal.
If the solution to the problem with the smaller
value of the objective is fractional, additional branching and computations may
be required.
PERPORMANCE OP THI ALGORITHMS
Two test networks were used to illustrate the value of the maximal covering
location approach as well as to evaluate the performance of the two heuristics
and the optimal linear programming approach.
The first network is a 30-node
problem designed hy Rojeski and
Revelle."
The second network contains 55
nodes and was described
by Swain."
Each network ensures randomness and
feasibility of the internode distances for geogra phic interpretation.
It is assumed
that each demand node is a possible facility site.
The optimal linear programming approach has been applied to many maximal
covering location problems defined on the 55-node network used by Swain.
In
obtaining all-integer optimal solutions, fractional linear programming solutions
were resolved hy first attempting to use the method of inspection described earlier.
II II. M. Wagner, Principlrs o] Operations Rrscarch with Applications to Munagerial Decisions
(Englewood C1ilT." N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1969),
"
P. Rojeski and C
ReVelle, "Central Fa<:ililies Location under an investment Construint,"
Geogruphlml Analysis, II, No.4 (1970).
•• R, Swain, "A Decomposition Algorithm for a Class of Facility Locution Aigcrithms," Ph.D.
thesis (Cornell I)niversily, Ithaca, N.Y., 1971).

--- PAGE 10 ---
...e
• Includes 19.18 seconds for four additional solutions obtained by Branch and Bound, none of which preserved a basis set for
restart.
.. Includes 1,75 seconds for one additional solution obtained b)' a single branching.
10,00
I to 9
12.00
I to 1
15.00
I to 5
19.00
I to 3
20.00
1 to 3
Total number
21
of Solutions
TABLE I
COMPARISO" Of AI.-GORITH"tS
Problem Data from 55-node !'et\\'ork, Ref. 19
LINEAR PROGRAMMl"G
o......
:I:...
:to.....o
!2
~...o
.z
<o..c
I:......
:I:;;...-e
.:..
:Eo
..
:to.....
'"...
'"...os
Z
:to.....
n
iiizn...
14
GAS ALGOll-lTH'"
I8
C A ALGORITH'"
Non-
I Total Est.
1'0n-
Total Est.
Optimal
Execution
I
Optimal
I Execution
Soluions
(values of
Time (sec)
Solutions
Time (sec)
n
'i (IBM 1094> (values of p)
(l BM 1094>
4,5:,6.
10,8
I
4, 5.7,8
I
23,6
7,8.,9
Z, 3, 4
4.1
1,3,4. 5
18,:
5, f
6, 1
2, 3.4, 5
6.0
3,4.5
13.5
2.3
1-8
2
8.1
2:
3.6
0
7.8
Total MPS
Time (secj
IBM360'91
1.38
3,4
29.35·
6.33
3
7.19"
4.25
3
5
3
8, 9
! Fractions i Branch and \
Resolved by I
Bound
I
(values of
J'eeded
p)
(values of p)I
6
5
3
8, 9
3,4
Fractional
Solutions
(values of
p)
Range of
pand
Number of
Solutions
Value
of S

--- PAGE 11 ---
(HUICH. IIVILLI.
MAXIMAL COVIllNO LOCATION nOILiM
111
If this
W;lS not possible, the method of Branch and Bound was used.
Table I compares the performance of the linear programming approach and
the heuristics in solving 27 maximal covering location problems defined
011 the
55-node net work.
For each service distance S, maximal covering solutions for a
range of p values were obtained using the MPS system with the parameterization
option.
Almost 80 percent of the linear programs terminated all-integer optimal.
Hod nearly 90 percent of the total problems were solved by the combination of
linear programming and the method of inspection.
Only 10 percent of the time
was Branch and Bound necessary to resolve fractional problems.
In every case of
application of the Branch and Hound algorithm, all that was necessary to obtain
an all-integer optimum was the solution of several linear programs.
Computation
times arc given for the MPS execution time only.
The GA algorithm was performed by a Fortran IV program on the IBM 7094
system.
Computation time includes the set-up of the particular maximal covering
location problem from basic data as well as the execution time of the algorithm.
From the table, it can be seen that the Gt\. algorithm is nonoptimal more than
60 percent of the time.
The GAS algorithm was also performed by a Fortran IV
program on the IBM 7094 system.
Computation time includes the development
of problem information from basic data as well as execution time of the algorithm.
The GAS algorithm was nonoptimal almost 50 percent of the time.
For each
heuristic solution
generated,
the coverage
was
no
lower
than
90 percent of the corresponding optimal coverage value.
In other words, the
heuristics applied to the 55-node network attained close to optimal solutions,
if not the optimal solutions.
One reason for this good performance is the fact
that the 55-node network contains a very dense area that can generally be covered
by one facility.
This tends to make the first facility's coverage so large that it
always remains the most significant portion of any solution.
The large significance of
the first facility tends to outweigh any differences in coverage due to added facil itics
which arc either heuristically or optimally determined.
While it is true that the
heuristics have done well in this problem, it is also true that the only reason we
can assess their quality is that we have an efficiently derived optimal solution to
which they may be compared.
Enumeration to determine optimal solutions for
comparison to heuristic solutions would generally be out of the question because
of the computer time it would consume.
For any
desired value of S (maximal service distance) and p value
(the
number of facilities to he located), a maximal covering location problem can be
defined.
By holding S fixed, and solving over a range of p values, one can create
a cost-effectiveness curve which outlines the change in effectiveness (in terms of
population covered) as the system cost is altered by increasing or decreasing the
number of available facilities.
Figure I shows the cost-effectiveness curve for the maximal covering location
problem defined on the 3D-node problem with the maximal service distance fixed

--- PAGE 12 ---
112
PAP••S O' fNI RlGIONAL SCIINCI ASSOCIATION, VOLUM. TNIUY.TWO
II
12
at S -
2.0.
This curve represents optimal maximal covering solutions obtained
hy the M PS syste m with the pa rameterization option.
The increase innumber of
people covered by the addition of one facility decreases as the total number of
facilities increases.
The optimal solution for p =
12 also represents an optimal
solution to the location set covering problem defined for S '" 2.0.
This is true,
since p 00 12 represents the lowest p value for which a 100 percent coverage is
attainable.
o
1000/.r--------------
o
NZ
~Q
90%
~
z<l
-...JeO,..
:I::::l
~Q.i a
700/.
0..
O...J
W <l 60%
a:~
W o
>~
o
~O%
Uu..
zO
Ow 400/.
-C)
!;i~
...J z
300/.
:::l .....
Q.u
o a:: 20%
Q.w
...JQ.
<l VI
100/.
~<l
)(
~
0
0"----'-------'-2------'-3-4
5
(;
7
8
9
10
NUMBER OF FACILITIES USED
..... IGlIK~
I,
A Co.n-EFHC1IVf.NESS CURVE
D~KIVEtJ
FOR S
,2.()() (DATA FOR 30-NOlll::
PROI1!,F.M FROM
RoJb~KI
ANI) REVELLE, RH', 19)
An important choice for the decision maker is deciding what level of expenditure
(how many facilities can be used) can be justified by the resultant coverage.
For
example, even if there are enough funds to build twelve facilities and cover 100
percent, the eight-facility solution and 90 percent coverage may be very acceptable.
Further, the reduced location cost may allow funds to be spent upgrading other
levels of service not related to location.
Thus, the cost-effectiveness curve yields
much
valuable
information
10 the decision
maker.
Such information
would
seem beneficial to the formulation or logical and sound location plans,
MAXIMAL COVERING WITH
MANDATORY CLOSENESS CONSTRAINTS
Even though a decision maker might seek 10 maximize coverage within some
desirable
maximal service distance,
there
may be
an
undesirable distance to

--- PAGE 13 ---
CHUACH, I.VILLI.
MAXIMAL COV'IIN. LOCATION 'IOILIM
113
facilities
beyond
which
no
demand
should
he.
Insistence on
some
type
of
mandatory closeness was introduced as a mechanism for achieving some form
of fairness for those not served within the shorter and more desirable service
distance S.
By including this mandatory closeness concept in the maximal covering
location problem, the following location problem was postulated:
Locate p facilities at possible sites on the network to maximize the population
that can he covered within a given service distance 5 while at the same time
ensuring that the users at each point of demand will find a facility no more
than T distance (T > S) away.
A mathematical formulation of this problem is very similar to Problem I.
The
objective function and the constraint on total number of facilities are identical
with those of the earlier formulation.
There are now,
however, two types of
covering constraints, namely:
and
where
for all j E I
for all j E I
(9)
( 10)
N; = UId;j :s; 5}
M, "-" Uld;; s: T}
and all other notation is as previously defined.
Note that since T> S. M; contains the set N,.
This is the maximal covering
location problem with mandatory closeness constraints.
The mandatory closeness
constraints (10) ensure for each demand point i that there must he at least one
facility within the distance T.
Unlike the problem without mandatory closeness,
this problem has feasible solutions only for certain integer values of p, the number
of facilities.
The lower limit of the range of values of p is the minimal number of
facilities necessary to cover all demand points within T distance units.
The same
variable substitution may be used to transform this to a problem which minimizes
population not covered within S while maintaining complete coverage within T.
Suppose that for a certain problem the smallest number of facilities necessary
for total coverage within T is p".
A p"-facility solution that does cover all within
T is an optimal location set covering solution since p" is the smallest number of
facilities necessary to cover all within T.
There could well be several different
p"-facility solutions that maintain total coverage of everyone within T distance units.
One could seek to maximize coverage within S (where S < T) while maintaining
total coverage within T by relocating the p'" facilities.
This implies that we would
be picking among the alternative optima to the location set covering problem the
solution that achieves the largest coverage within the smaller distance S.
The

--- PAGE 14 ---
114
PAPIRS O. THI RIGIONAL SCIINCI ASSOCIATION, VOLUMI THIRTY.TWO
use of maximal covering with mandatory closeness constraints, then, can be con-
sidered a technique for obtaining more desirable solutions than the location set
covering problem.
The new solutions will continue to cover the entire population
and are desirable in the sense that they provide greater population coverage within
an even closer and more desirable distance.
The maximal covering location problem with mandatory closeness constraints
has been solved by applying linear programming to the minimizing form of the
problem, that is, by minimizing the number not covered within S While maintaining
complete coverage within T.
The problem was solved using the MPS 360 system on
the IBM 360 Model 91 computer.
Again, if more than one p-facility solution
was desired, the MPS parameterization option was used.
Essentially, the problem
with mandatory closeness constraints is set up with the number of facilities equal to
the smallest number of facilities necessary to cover all demand within T distance
units; the
parameterization option
was
used
to develop optimal answers for
increasing values of fl.
It is not necessary to allow p to be greater than the number
of facilities needed to cover all demand nodes within the smaller distance S.
In
limiled computa Iiona I expcrience, eight out of eleven
Iinear pro grams
terminated all-integer, and hence optimal to the zero-one problem.
All fractional
linear programming solutions were able to be resolved hy the method of inspection.
A heuristic approach to solve the problem is also possible."
Suppose thai a decision maker is interested in covering all demand within a
service distance of 15.
Let us say that the 55-node network represents his par-
ticular problem.
His goal, we will assume, is to achieve complete cowmgf' with
the fewest
possible facilities.
The decision maker is implicitly structuring the
location set covering problem" for S --- IS.
This is the minimum number of
facilities
which
accomplishes coverage
within
a
specified maximum
distance.
Figure 2 gives a location set covering solution for a service distance of S ._- 15 on
the 55-node network.
In this case five facilities arc required to cover all nodes
within a distance of 15.
The circled nodes on the graph given in Figure 2 represent the live sites chosen
to house facilit ies.
The nodes of the graph are partitioned into sets, each node
being assigned to its closest facility.
In Figure 2 there are two types of partitions:
those enclosed by solid lines and those indicated hy dashed lines.
The solid line
partitions indicate which
nodes arc covered within S -
IS.
The
dashed line
partitions
denote
which
nodes
are
covered
within
.S·
10.
The
reason
for
showing which nodes are covered by this solution within a distance of 10 will become
clear momentarily.
For example, node 42 is in the solid line partition surrounding
H facility located at node 25.
This means that the closest facility to node 42 is
located at node 25 and that the distance from node 42 to that facility is less than
15.
Furthermore, node 42 is not in the dashed line partition for the facility
11 Church, op. cit.
.. Toregas and Revelle, up. cit.

--- PAGE 15 ---
CHUICH, IIVILLI,
MAXIMAL COYIIING LOCATION PIO.LlM
115
SOUD liNt P~RTITIUNS
UtNUl E COVfR~OIl
WIIIIIN,.
,,; "ASItU> I.INE PAUllIDN
DtNDU UWI':RAUE WI'IIIIN
~. '. 10,
fOriTI.ATION INSIDn 10-,,---
,;101
POPULATloN oUTSIDIl 1GBU r INsme II .
,,~l'
PO!:!!L~TIU~-')Umll!l
•.JJ
D
FIGURE 2.
A LOCATION SET COV[RINU SOLUTION FOR S
15
(DATA fROM SWAIN, REf. 20)
located at node 25, indicating that node 42 lies at a distance greater than 10 from
its closest facility, node 25.
Figure 2 also shows, for this particular location set
covering solution, that 201 of the total population are covered within a distance of
10; the rest of the population, 439, is located between 10 and the maximal service
distance of 15.
It was stated in the previous section that the maximal covering location prob-
lem
with
mandatory
closeness
constraints could
be used
to choose among
the alternative optima of the location set covering problem, the solution which
achieves the best coverage for some more desirable "inner" distance.
For example,
by solving the maximal covering location problem with mandatory closeness con-
straints with S =
10 and T =
IS, still using five facilities we could determine the
solution that provides the best coverage within S =
10 while maintaining com-

--- PAGE 16 ---
116
..A..IRS O' THI IIGIONAL SCIINCI ASSOCIATION, VOLUMI THIITY.TWO
I'I{aJIt~~.
AN OI'TIMAI. SOUJTlON TO TIW
MAXIMAL COVERING loCATION
PROIll.EM WITH MANDATORY
CI.OS~N~SS
CONSTRAINTS
(DATA I-ROM SWAIN,
R~ ... 20)
plete coverage within T =
15.
H is entirely possible that the decision maker may feel it desirable to cover as
much population as possible within 10 if he can still provide complete coverage
wit hin 15.
After all, he appears to be giving up not hing.
The maxi rnaI covering
location problem with mandatory closeness constraints with S -
10 and T = 15
was solved for this network and the solution is presented in Figure 3.
Essentially,
Figure 3 depicts the alternative optimum of the location set covering problem for
.\' -
15 which covers the maximum population within 10.
Notice that the coverage
within 10 for this solution amounts to 354 out of 640.
By the nature of the maximal
covering problem with
mandatory closeness constraints, it is possible to state
that no more than 354 can be covered within 10 while maintaining complete coverage

--- PAGE 17 ---
CHUkCH, k.VILLI,
MAXIMAL COV.kINO LOCATION "kOILiM
117
within IS, given no more than five facilities,
The solution in Figure 3 is clearly
a better solution than the one given in Figure 2, for the coverage within to is 75
percent better than the solution given in Figure 2.
Therefore, by using the maximal
covering location problem with mandatory closeness constraints, it is possible to
easily determine the most desirable location set covering solutions.
In the above
problem, the
use or the maximal covering location approach with mandatory
closeness constraints has provided substantial improvement over the original loca-
tion set covering solution given in Figure 2.
We know that it is impossible to cover more than 354 within 10 while
maintaining co mplete coverage with in 15 using five facilities.
Thus, it wou ld be futile
to try to cover more than 354 within 10 unless either more facilities were allowed or
the mandatory closeness constraints or 15 were relinquished.
!II•
FIG(J/l.E 4.
AN OPTIMAl SOLlJTION TO 1'111; MAXIMAL COVERINO LoC"TION
PROBLEM fOR S·
10 (DATA nlOM SWAIN. REF. 20)

--- PAGE 18 ---
118
',"liS O' THI IIGIOMAL SCIINCI ASSOCIATION, VOLUMI TNIRTY-TWO
In the above example problem, it is, in fact. possible to achieve a very large
"maxi mal cover" within S -
lOusing live facilities if one relaxes the mandatory
closeness constraint of IS.
From the viewpoint of the decision maker, achieving
maximal coverage by five facilities within a distance of 10 could be very desirable,
if the resultant coverage within 10 is sufficiently improved from 354 and if the
number of people outside of 15 is not excessive.
Figure 4 gives
a maximal covering solution for S =
10.
A node in the
graph which is not covered within
T =
IS is not included in any partition.
Notice that the population covered within S..,." 10 has reached 609 out of a total
population of 640.
In this case, only four nodes with a combined population of
12 are at a distance greater than 15 from their closest facilities.
In order to cover all demand nodes within 15, the amount covered within 10
must decrease from 609, given by the maximal covering problem with S -
10, tn
at most 354 which value was given by the
maximal covering problem with a
mandatory closeness constraint of 15.
This reduction of 255 in the population
covered within 10 can he viewed as one of the costs of maintaining all nodes within
a maximum distance of 15.
That is, the mandatory closeness constraints ensured
that a population totahng 11 out of 64(l (at four out of 55 nodes) found service
within 15 distance units.
At the same time. a population totaling 255 was forced
outside the distance of 10.
In summary. it has been shown that the maximal covering location problem
and the maximal covering location problem with mandatory closeness constraints
are powerful location techniques which build on and, in Iuct, supplant the location
scl covering problem,
The maximal covering location problem with mandatory
closeness, furthermore. may be used to provide the most dcsira hlc (If the solutions
to the location set covering problem.
Jt is also easy to sec that "good" locationul
decisions can be made by all three techniq ucs, hut enlightened use of the maximal
covering location problems appears to lead to superior patterns of population
coverage.
The above example problems show that the additional
information
gained by using these two techniques in conjunction with the locat ion set covering
approach can lead to better decision making with regard to public facility location,
